Hello! In this tutorial, we will create the PlayerController class. Let's add our own input to it
and learn how to switch between multiple pays.
First, let's tweak the SandboxPawn class a bit. Let's add a visual part to it so that we can distinguish the spiders on the stage.
Let's add two additional components. The first one we are familiar with is the static mesh component.
The second component is new, it is called UCameraComponent, it is responsible for the settings of the camera viewport.
We need to include the appropriate header file for this component. Let's connect
it in C ++, and in the .h file add a forward declaration of this class. For those who do not know what a
forward declaration is, I recommend reading it, because we will use this concept all the time.
Go to the .cpp file and include the header files for the static mesh component and the camera component.
Let's create two components by analogy with SceneComponent. For this we use the CreateDefaultSubobject function.
Next, we need to add these components to the component hierarchy of our spawn.
To do this, we will use the SceneComponent function called SetupAttachment. Yes, precisely by the SceneComponent
function , because both the static mesh and the camera component inherit from SceneComponent.
It is a basic component that has a transformation in the scene. The
function also takes a pointer to the SceneComponent as a parameter . We will attach to
our root component, which is the scene component. Therefore, we can explicitly pass
a pointer to our component to the function , or do it a little differently: use the
actor function called GetRootComponent. This function returns a pointer to the root
component of the actor. In the previous section, we specified the SceneComponent as the root, so both of
these options are suitable for us. In the same way we attach the camera component.
The hierarchy of component scenes in the actor can be configured in an arbitrary way, that is, you can attach a camera to a
static mesh, or vice versa. It all depends on the design of your actor. Essentially, attachment affects the final transformation
matrix of your component, which will be calculated as the product of the
parent component's transformation matrix by the local transformation matrix. You can change the transformation
relative to the parent component using functions that begin
with SetRelative .. You can change all elements of the transformation: scale, location and rotation.
Let's see how it all looks in blueprints. Therefore, we compile the project.
Open the directory with C ++ classes. Let's create a blueprint class based on our C ++ class.
Let's call it BP_SandboxPawn. Click the create blueprint class button. We look on the left into the Components window.
All components of our actor are presented here. The scene component is the root
component and a static mesh component and a camera component are attached to it . Let's set some kind of mesh to a static
mesh component. For example, a cube. The cube is gigantic. Let's change the scale for him. Let it be 0.3 Let's
move the camera a little further. We change the scale of the cube and the position of the camera in space relative to the
parent transformation. Let's create an additional component in blueprints as an example.
Let's select a cube and attach it to the camera. And if you and I change the position of the camera in space, then the cube
also changes its position, because it is a child component of the camera component.
Save the blueprint. In WorldSettings, we see that we cannot change any other classes except GameMode.
This is because our GameMode only has a C ++ version. Let's create a
blueprint of our C ++ GameMode successor. Add BP_ to the class name.
We can select the DefaultPawnClass we are interested in inside the GameMode blueprint. We select our BP_SandboxPawn.
We are saved. In world settings, we specify the blueprint game mod and now we can configure
any class of interest to us. We start the game. Our pawn now has an appearance. This is the geometry of a cube.
Let's add some additional mapping. Go to project settings, to the input category. This time we need
action mapping. We will switch between different pounders on a key press. Let's call our
action mapping ChangePawn. And add any key. Let it be a gap. Find spacebar. Switching between pays
will take place in the playercontroller class. So let's create this class.
Find the PlayerController class in the list.
Click Next. Let's call our class SandboxPlayerController.
Click on Create Class. Our own playercontroller class has been created. Unlike other
actors, it is completely empty, so all functions will have to be added manually.
We'll start by overriding the playercontroller class in game mode. Open the game mod .cpp file.
We include the header file playercontroller.
The proper game mod for the playercontroller class is named PlayerControllerClass.
We override it by analogy, as we did for the pawn class.
We return to the controller class. Click on playercontroller F12. Let's start with a function
that configures input. Press Ctrl + F and in the search will be SetupInput
Copy this function and redefine the playercontroller in our class.
We create a protected section.
Create the body of the function in a .cpp file.
So playercontroller can accept input too. The controller's SetupInputComponent function is
slightly different from the corresponding pawn function. In the spawn function, a pointer to the
input component is passed as an argument to the function. For playercontroller, this input
component is a member of the class. We will also include the component input header file in the controller.
The member of the class is called InputComponent. We can directly address it and bind the mappings
we need. This time we need another component input function called BindAction.
It is responsible for the binding of discrete mappings and is slightly different from the BindAxis function.
In the first argument, we need to specify the name of our ChangePawn mapping. The second parameter is of type EInputEvent.
This is an enum. It is responsible for the type of event that happens to the control.
We will pass the IE_Pressed value there. If you press F12, you can see what values
this enum has. The main types are when the key is pressed, or when the key is released. We have specified
IE_Pressed and our callback function will be called when a key is pressed. And the last two classic
parameters for delegates are a pointer to an object and a reference to a called function.
We will now create the function. Let's call it ChangePawn. And in the .h file, create a private section.
We declare the sleeper ChangePawn function for the action mapping callback functions. No parameters are needed in the signature.
Create the body of the function in a .cpp file.
Let's create our own logging category for the controller. We copy the macro we know.
And we will immediately pledge that we are changing the pawn.
So, in our case, the ChangePawn function is called every time we press the spacebar. We will add some pawns
to the stage a little later and add logic to the ChangePawn function that will allow changing the pawn that
we are currently controlling to one of those on the stage. First, we need to somehow
get all the spiders that are on the stage. The most convenient way to do this is in the BeginPlay function,
which is called once at the start of the game. Every actor has a BeginPlay function.
The player controller is also an actor, so we can override its BeginPlay function.
Create the body of the BeginPlay function in a .cpp file. There are many different helper classes
in the unreal engine that greatly speed up the development process. One of these classes is called UGameplayStatics. Let's include
its header file Kismet / GameplayStatics This class consists of various static
functions. All the functions of this class are also available in blueprints, so if you have worked
with them before , then many of the functions of this class will be familiar to you. The GameplayStatics function, which
allows you to get all the actors of a certain type from the scene, is called GetAllActorsOfClass.
This function takes three arguments. The first one is a pointer to a WorldContextObject -
essentially any object in the game. We can pass both a pointer to the global world object by calling
the GetWorld function, and a pointer to the current player controller object, passing the this keyword there.
The next parameter is a pointer to the class whose objects we want to get.
We want to get all SandboxPawn, so we pass a pointer to this class.
And you also need to add the SandboxPawn header file.
The last parameter is an array of pointers to actors. This parameter is passed by reference, i.e. passing an array to the function,
we get it filled with pointers to the actors of the type of interest to us, which are on the stage.
Let's create a local array of pointers to actors for this purpose. Let's call it Pawns.
This function returns an array of pointers to the base type of the actor. We will have to do Cast - that is, convert the
pointer from AActor type to APawn type. We will switch pawns in the ChangePawn function,
so we need to make this array a member of our class. Go
to the header file and add this array to the private section. We also mark this class member with the
UPROPERTY macro, without any parameters. Why this is needed, we will consider in the next lecture.
So, go to the ChangePawn function and at the very beginning check that the number of array
elements we have is greater than one, i.e. we check that we have at least one more pounder to which we
can switch. The TArray function that returns the number of elements in an array
is called Num. Therefore, if this value is less than or equal to one, then we immediately exit the function.
Next, we get a pointer to pawn from the array. To do this, we create a local variable of the
type of a pointer to ASandboxPawn, although in this particular case, we just need a pointer
to the base APawn class. We name the variable CurrentPawn and assign this variable to a custom element from the
array. Each time you press the space bar, we will receive a new pawn, changing the array index.
We are missing an array element index variable. Let's call it CurrentPawnIndex.
Let's add it to the SandboxPawn header file. It will have the integer type int32 and by default we will
assign it 0. After that, we need to increase the CurrentPawnIndex by one so that the next
time we press the spacebar, we get the next element of the array - the next pawn. Let's take the whole expression
modulo the size of the array so that CurrentPawnIndex never goes beyond its bounds. Under the lecture there will be a
link to how the modulo operator works (if anyone is not in the know)
Next, we check for nullptr the pointer to the pawn, over which we want to gain control.
If the pointer is null, then immediately exit the function. Optionally, you can also check that the pawn that we want to install
does not match the current pawn. The player controller function that changes
control of the pawn is called Possess. It takes as an argument a pointer to the pawn
that we want to control.
Let's print the log before calling this function.
And additionally, let's add two functions to the SandboxPawn class, which are called directly when control over the pawn has
been acquired and when it has been lost. The functions are virtual, they are in the base pounder class.
And we can override them in our own class. The first is called PossessedBy
. It has one parameter - a pointer to the controller
that took control of this spawn. And the second function is called UnPossessed.
We create it in a .cpp file.
We added these functions purely for educational purposes, so that we know about their existence and see in what order they are called.
Therefore, there will be no logic in them, we just display messages in the console.
In the Possess function, we display the names of the pawn and the controller that captured our spawn.
The UnPossess function comes without parameters, so we just print the name of the pawn.
Let's see what we got. Launch editor.
In WorldSettings, we see that the player controller class has been overridden. We have specified SandboxPlayerController.
Let's add some spiders to the scene.
Let's place them in different parts of the scene.
We start the game. At the beginning we control the default spawn and there are also 3 additional spawns on the stage.
We press the spacebar and we have gained control over another pawn.
Once again, a space is above the next, and so on.
Let's clear the log. We will also remove the GeometryHubActor from the scene so that we do not have spam in the log.
We start the game. In the penultimate line, we see that SandboxPawn_C0 was captured by the controller - this is our default pawn.
And before that, we see other 3 lines, in which it is reported that AIController took possession of other pawns.
Also, if we look in WorldOutliner, we will see that there are 3 data on the scene. AIController
Unreal did it automatically. We can change the settings as we don't need the AIController right now.
Open the pawn class and in the settings we find a property called Auto Possess AI.
By default, this property is in Place World.
We can turn off the AIController spawn by selecting the Disabled option.
Compile the blueprint. Open the log, clear it and run the game again.
All now no AIController has spawned. We can see this both in WorldOutliner and in our log.
Press the space bar, we see all the information in the logs.
Changed the pawn. The UnPossess function was called on the current pawn and the Possess function was called
on the pounder we got control over.
We have a bug: if we hold down any movement key and at this moment change the pawn,
then the previous pawn will continue to move. Let's fix this bug.
So, we move around the scene: that is, one of the keys, or both of us are held down and at the moment
we press the spacebar to change the pawn. Then the UnPossess function is called.
If you go into the parent UnPossess function, you can see that the DestroyPlayerInputComponent function is called.
In this function, the input component is removed. After that, the binding of all our functions is automatically
removed and when the user releases the key, the MoveForward and MoveRight functions will not be called.
Therefore, VelocityVector components will never nullify. This bug can be fixed in several ways.
The first of them is to add an additional condition when we change the position of the actor.
The spawn class has helper functions that check who owns a given spawn.
Functions start with IsControlled .. Just IsControlled, IsPlayerControlled, IsLocallyControlled, and so on.
Let's go into the IsControlled function. The pounder has a pointer member to the current controller, and in fact it
checks if it is a playercontroller or not. Below we see that there is a function IsPawnControlled
that simply checks if any controller exists. It can be either AIController or PlayerController.
But there is an easier way to fix this bug:
after we set the pawn to a new position, just reset the VelocityVector.
Set it to ZeroVector
Let's also add null pointer checks in the PossessdBy function. We are using a pointer to the
controller, but we do not check for nullptr. Also check the PlayerInputComponent
And in the SandboxPlayerController we also used InputComponent. Add it under the if
This concludes this lesson.